Session 03
Problem Solving, Algorithms, Pseudocode & SDLC Basics


What are you going to learn in this session?
In this session, you are going to learn how programmers think.
You will understand:
* What problem solving means in software development
* What an algorithm is and why it is important
* How to write step-by-step solutions in plain English
* What pseudocode is and how it connects ideas to real code
* How software is built in the real world using a structured process called SDLC
This session is not about writing complex programs. It is about learning how to think clearly before writing any code.
Think of this session as learning how to plan before you build.


Why is this topic important?
Many beginners believe programming is about typing code. In reality, programming is about thinking.
If you cannot think clearly:
* You cannot design correct solutions
* You cannot explain your ideas
* You cannot debug errors
* You cannot scale your software
Code is just the final expression of your thinking.
Imagine building a house without a plan. You start placing bricks randomly. The result will collapse.
Similarly, if you write code without clear steps, your program will fail.
This session teaches you how to:
* Break problems into smaller parts
* Organize your thoughts
* Convert ideas into structured logic
* Understand how real-world software is developed
These skills are more important than memorizing syntax.


How should you prepare yourself to attend this session?
You should prepare yourself mentally to think step by step.
Before attending:
* Be ready to participate.
* Do not focus on programming language syntax.
* Be open to simple examples.
* Keep a notebook ready.
* Be ready to explain solutions in your own words.
You must remember:
Today is about thinking like a programmer.


What should you do after the session?
After this session:
1. Practice writing step-by-step solutions for simple problems.
2. Try converting daily tasks into algorithms.
3. Write pseudocode for 2–3 small logical problems.
4. Reflect on how structured thinking makes problems easier.
5. Read about SDLC again and connect it with real apps you use.
This practice will strengthen your logical thinking.


Class Notes
1. Problem Solving in Software
Problem solving in software means taking a real-world problem and creating a clear, logical solution that a computer can follow.
Software does not guess. It follows instructions exactly.
So your job as a programmer is to:
* Understand the problem
* Break it into smaller steps
* Arrange those steps in the correct order
* Make sure nothing is missing
Think about making tea.
Steps might be:
1. Boil water
2. Add tea leaves
3. Add sugar
4. Add milk
5. Pour into cup
If you skip boiling water, the tea cannot be made.
This sequence of steps is an algorithm.
2. What is an Algorithm?
An algorithm is simply a step-by-step solution to a problem.
It must be:
* Clear
* Complete
* In the correct order
Example: Logging into an app
1. Enter username
2. Enter password
3. Click login
4. Check if credentials are correct
5. If correct → open dashboard
6. Else → show error
That is an algorithm.
It does not need to be complex. It just needs to be logical.
Avoid thinking that algorithms are only for advanced math. They are simply structured instructions.
3. From Problem to Algorithm
Let us take a simple problem:
Check whether a number is even or odd.
Step 1: Understand the Problem
You need to determine if a number is divisible by 2.
Step 2: Identify Inputs and Outputs
Input: A number
Output: "Even" or "Odd"
Step 3: Write Steps in Plain English
1. Take the number
2. Divide it by 2
3. Check the remainder
4. If remainder is 0 → number is even
5. Otherwise → number is odd
Notice that this is not code. It is thinking.
This clarity makes coding easy later.
4. Introduction to Pseudocode
Pseudocode is structured plain English used to describe an algorithm.
It is not a programming language.
It does not follow strict syntax rules.
It is just a bridge between thinking and coding.
Guidelines for pseudocode:
* Write clear steps
* Use indentation for structure
* Use words like IF, ELSE, LOOP
* Keep it readable
Let us convert our algorithm into pseudocode:
START
    INPUT number
    IF number MOD 2 == 0
        PRINT "Even"
    ELSE
        PRINT "Odd"
END
This is not tied to any specific programming language.
It is structured thinking.
Pseudocode helps you focus on logic without worrying about syntax errors.
5. From Pseudocode to Code (Light Exposure)
Now let us see how pseudocode might look in a real language.
Example in JavaScript:
let number = 10;


if (number % 2 === 0) {
    console.log("Even");
} else {
    console.log("Odd");
}
Notice how similar it is to pseudocode.
The structure remains the same.
You are not expected to understand every symbol yet.
The goal is to see that:
Good thinking → Clear pseudocode → Clean code.
6. Why Process Matters – Introduction to SDLC
In the real world, software is not built randomly.
There is a process called SDLC — Software Development Life Cycle.
You can think of SDLC as the life journey of a software product.
Just like humans are born, grow, mature, and evolve, software also follows stages.
If you skip stages, problems occur.
SDLC ensures:
* Clarity
* Planning
* Testing
* Improvement
Without process, software becomes messy and unstable.
7. SDLC Phases (High Level)
Let us understand SDLC through an example: a food delivery app.
1. Planning
Decide what to build.
Example: Allow users to order food online.
2. Design
Decide how it should look and work.
Example: Home page, restaurant list, cart system.
3. Development
Write the actual code.
4. Testing
Check if it works correctly.
Does payment fail? Does login break?
5. Deployment
Release it to users.
6. Maintenance
Fix bugs and add improvements.
This cycle continues again and again.
Software is never truly “finished.”
8. SDLC Methodologies (Awareness Only)
Different teams follow different styles of working.
You only need awareness at this stage.
Waterfall
Each phase is completed fully before moving to the next.
Agile
Work is divided into small iterations and continuous improvements.
DevOps
Development and operations teams work closely together for faster delivery and maintenance.
You do not need to compare them right now. Just know they exist.
Key Takeaways
* Programming is about thinking clearly before writing code.
* An algorithm is a step-by-step solution.
* Good problem solving means breaking problems into smaller parts.
* Pseudocode helps you express logic without worrying about syntax.
* Real-world software follows SDLC, not random coding.
* Planning and process are as important as coding skills.
* Clear thinking leads to clean software.
After this session, you should start observing daily life tasks as algorithms.
From today onward, when you face a problem, do not think “How do I code this?”
First think, “What are the steps?”