Session 02
Essentials of Computer Programming


What are you going to learn in this session?
In this session, you are going to understand how programming actually works.


You will learn:


* Why programming exists in the first place
* How computers understand instructions
* What programming languages are
* How code is converted into something a computer can execute
* The core building blocks that are common across all programming languages


This session is not about mastering any one language like Java, Python, or JavaScript. Instead, it is about understanding the foundation that is common to all programming languages.


Think of this session as learning the grammar of programming before you start writing full essays in any language.




Why is this topic important?
Many beginners jump directly into writing code without understanding how programming works internally. This often leads to confusion later.


If you understand:


* Why computers need programming
* How instructions are structured
* How code gets executed
* What core concepts are universal


Then learning any programming language becomes much easier.


Programming languages may change. Frameworks may change. But the core ideas behind programming remain the same.


If Session 01 helped you understand the software industry, this session helps you understand the foundation of software itself.


Without this foundation, you will feel like you are memorizing code. With this foundation, you will understand what you are doing.




How should you prepare yourself to attend this session?
You do not need any coding experience to attend this session.


However, you should:


* Come with curiosity.
* Be ready to think logically.
* Keep a notebook to note down new terms.
* Avoid worrying about syntax.
* Focus on concepts, not memorization.


During this session, ask yourself:


* Why does a computer need this?
* What problem is this concept solving?
* How does this idea apply to all languages?


This mindset will help you build strong fundamentals.




What should you do after the session?
After this session:


1. Review your notes and rewrite definitions in your own words.
2. Practice writing simple pseudocode.
3. Try explaining programming concepts to someone else in simple language.
4. Reflect on how code flows from writing to execution.
5. Prepare mentally for actual language-specific coding in upcoming sessions.


This session gives you the mental model you need before touching real syntax.


Class Notes
1. Why Programming Exists
Computers are extremely powerful machines. But they are also extremely simple.


A computer does not understand:


* English
* Hindi
* Emotions
* Context


It only understands electrical signals. At the lowest level, a computer understands binary — 0s and 1s.


You can think of binary like a switch:


* 1 means ON
* 0 means OFF


Inside your computer, billions of tiny switches turn on and off extremely fast.


But imagine trying to control your laptop using only 0s and 1s. That would be nearly impossible for humans.


So we created programming languages.


Programming exists because computers need precise, step-by-step instructions.


If you tell a computer:


“Sort these numbers.”


It cannot guess what you mean. You must specify:


* Where the numbers are stored
* How to compare them
* What steps to repeat
* When to stop


Programming is simply writing very clear and very specific instructions.


Think of it like giving directions to someone who follows instructions exactly and never assumes anything.




2. Programming Languages Overview
A programming language is a structured way of writing instructions for a computer.


There are two broad categories:
High-Level Languages
Examples:


* Python
* Java
* JavaScript


These are easier for humans to read and write. They look closer to English.


They hide complex details about hardware.
Low-Level Languages
Example:


* Assembly


These are closer to machine language and give more control over hardware.


They are harder to read and write.


You can think of this tradeoff like driving:


* High-level language is like driving an automatic car.
* Low-level language is like manually controlling every gear and mechanical part.


Most modern development uses high-level languages because they improve productivity.




3. Order of Instructions (Sequence)
Programming depends heavily on order.


Computers execute instructions line by line, from top to bottom (unless told otherwise).


If you write:


1. Print result
2. Calculate result


This will fail because the computer tries to print something that is not yet calculated.


Programming is like a recipe.


If you:


* Bake the cake before mixing ingredients. It will not work.


Order matters.




4. From Code to Execution
When you write code, you are writing source code.


Source code is human-readable.


But the computer cannot directly understand it.


So it must be translated.


There are two main approaches:
Compiler
A compiler translates the entire program into machine code before execution.


After compilation, you get an executable file.


Example conceptually: C++ → compiled → executable file → run
Interpreter
An interpreter translates and executes code line by line.


Example conceptually: Python → interpreter reads → executes immediately


Some languages combine both approaches.


For example: Java → compiled to bytecode → executed by JVM JavaScript → executed by a JavaScript engine inside the browser


You do not need to memorize the flows. Just understand:


All human-written code must be translated before the computer can execute it.




5. Core Programming Building Blocks
Now we move to concepts common across all languages.
Syntax
Syntax is the grammar of a programming language.


Just like English grammar has rules, programming languages have rules.


If you break syntax rules, the program will not run.




Keywords
Keywords are reserved words that have special meaning.


Examples:


* if
* else
* return
* function


You cannot use these words as variable names.




Identifiers
Identifiers are names given to:


* Variables
* Functions


For example:


totalMarks
calculateSum


These names help humans understand the program.




Case Sensitivity
Many languages treat uppercase and lowercase differently.


For example:


age
Age


These may be treated as two different variables.




Statements
A statement is a single instruction.


Example in pseudocode:


SET x = 10
PRINT x


Each line is one instruction.




Code Blocks and Scope
A code block is a group of statements treated as one unit.


For example, inside an if condition or loop.


Scope defines where a variable is accessible.


Think of scope like rooms in a house. A variable created inside one room may not be visible outside that room.




Comments
Comments are notes written inside code for humans.


They are ignored by the computer.


Example:


# This calculates total marks


Comments improve readability and maintainability.




6. Fundamental Programming Concepts
Variables
A variable is a container that stores data.


Think of it as a labeled box.


If you write:


SET age = 20


You are storing the value 20 in a box called age.




Data Types
Different types of data exist:


* Numbers (10, 3.14)
* Text ("Hello")
* Boolean (true / false)


The computer needs to know what kind of data it is handling.




Operators
Operators perform actions.


Examples:


   * (addition)
   * (subtraction)
* == (comparison)


If you write:


IF age > 18


The operator > compares values.




Data Collections
Sometimes you need to store multiple values.
Arrays / Lists
Store ordered values.


Example:


[10, 20, 30]
Maps / Objects
Store key-value pairs.


Example:


name: "John"
age: 25


________________


Loops
Loops repeat instructions.


Example:


FOR each number in list
    PRINT number


Loops save you from writing repetitive code.




Conditionals
Conditionals allow decision-making.


Example:


IF age > 18
    PRINT "Adult"
ELSE
    PRINT "Minor"


Conditionals make programs dynamic.




Functions
Functions are reusable blocks of code.


Instead of writing the same logic multiple times, you define it once and call it when needed.


Think of functions like a machine inside a factory. You give it input, it processes, and gives output.




7. Object-Oriented Programming (Very High Level)
As programs grow larger, organizing code becomes important.


Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is one way to structure large programs.


Key concepts include:


* Encapsulation
* Inheritance
* Polymorphism


You do not need to understand these deeply right now. You only need to know that OOP helps organize complex systems.


These concepts will be covered in detail later in the program.




Key Takeaways
* Computers only understand binary, so we use programming languages to communicate clearly.
* Programming is writing precise, step-by-step instructions.
* Code must be translated before execution.
* Order of instructions matters.
* Core concepts like variables, loops, conditionals, and functions exist in all languages.
* Syntax is the grammar of programming.
* Understanding concepts is more important than memorizing language-specific syntax.


After this session, you should feel less intimidated by programming. You now understand the logic behind how it works.


In upcoming sessions, you will begin applying these concepts in real programming languages.